Thank you. Good morning everyone.
How is everyone feeling this morning?
Great.
I hope you all enjoy your time here and
I hope uh some of these teachings are
beneficial.
Um today we will go through more verses
from
the 37 practice bodhic satta.
But before we do that, take a moment and
uh correct your motivation.
Now I'm going to pick up where I left
last class which is the 13th verse.
Right.
Okay. Even if someone cut my your head
when you do not have the slightest fault
out of compassion taken upon yourself
the negativities of that person is the
practice of bodhicattas.
This is an
intense verse
and powerful.
Is this really possible?
For most people
probably not.
But for bodhic sattas, yeah. Yes, it is
absolutely possible.
Because in Mayana Buddhism,
the bodhic sattas are able to cultivate
boundless love and uh compassion.
So it really depends on how far your
compassion
stretch
extend, right? And how much of your ego
you are willing to let go through
bodhicetta practice
again um kingapuno when I received this
teaching he said specifically on this
verse you know we don't have capacity to
handle this kind of situation at this
moment
but we should pray that someday
in the future we can do it and uh he
said someday we will have this capacity.
Um
this verse deals with the practice of
bodhicitta
and the situation of
um being murdered
even when you did nothing wrong.
It demonstrates how a bodhic satta
reacts to this situation. So it is um it
is an example of cultivating the highest
level of patience.
The highest level of patience,
forgiveness
and compassion and the mahayana bodhic
sappa path.
So when a bodhic satta is totally
totally
free of ego,
free of selfishness,
they're not attached to their own safety
or or reputation.
Instead, they focus on the suffering of
others.
So it says taking upon yourself the
negativities of that person.
This doesn't mean we can take their
negative karma.
Um and no one can do that.
But we can
uh influence
others positively by our actions.
prayers and compassion
um which may inspire them to create good
karma so that
their negative karma can be purified.
So we can help them
in ways that uh reduce their suffering
and support
them
in creating better karma
otherwise you know no one can take
someone's negative karma away from them
um according to you know
Buddhism
so taking upon yourself the negativities
of that person
here means means
transforming your own mind
and cultivating
uh
selflessness
and
uh it reflects a profound commitment and
aspiration to cultivate uh compassion
for the suffering of others.
So the point here is
as Mahayana practitioner
uh it encourages
patience and forgiveness
and is a reminder to
meet challenges with compassion rather
than hat it.
So a bodhic sattva in this situation
should not feel anger or hatred but have
a feeling of you know sadness that
someone could actually do such a thing
and in experiencing that sed
bodhic satta will uh naturally make a
great aspiration for that negative
person.
So if you get angry in this situation,
you don't only lose
your body but also you lose your heart
of bodhicitta as well.
So therefore we need to uh contemplate
on this verse in our daily lives so that
when we uh face difficult situation it
will help us uh to remember
uh patience and forgiveness right even
though we're not there yet but this
verse really um tells us how important
to be patient and and forgiveness in
this kind of situation even though
you're not you're not doing anything
wrong but for others you know um
ignorance and negative karma so you will
understand how important to be patient
and compassionate
so even though we don't have this kind
of capacity at that moment this moment
but it will help us if we remember this
verse you know this this stanza
and it says even if someone cuts off
your head when you do not have the
slightest fault.
So this is exactly what is happening
uh for example if you think about
uh to animals all the time right
the
is not exactly talking about only human
beings all beings right
so if you think about animals don't have
The slightest vault,
but the sliders cut their hand head
and
uh fishermen cook fish alive in boiling
oil or water or whatever.
So exactly it it says even if someone
cuts of your head when you do not have
the slightest fault
then people might think oh that's
impossible. It is possible you can see
like how exactly this is exactly what
happened to animals all the time every
day any you know every
minutes and hours you know they're doing
these things.
So from a body surface view
such suffering brings compassion
not just for the you know
uh animals like fish but also for the
for example you know fisherman you know
someone who is so ignorance no
compassion
or maybe they have a little bit seed of
compassion but they just don't extent.
So bodhic sappa they have a compassion.
Sometimes I find it difficult to feel uh
really compassion for people who harm
those animals
when uh
I watch the videos and you know why why
can't do that? them. If you want to kill
them, they just kill like they just they
just put fish or anything alive. You
know this Asian people sometimes they uh
eat crabs like alive just put it I'm
just it's just unbelievable right so
when I see that I have difficult to feel
compassion for those people I I have
compassion for the animals but uh but
bodhic is not like that.
Bodhi sapph
people than the animals cuz they are so
ignorant and create such a you know you
see this harmful um this actions you
know
so but we if you watch videos like that
you have
difficult to feel compassion for people
but if if if you don't have compassion
for the person who is harming the
animals um it's not good for us because
u we are going to lose bodhicitta. So if
you don't have compassion then you are
kind of angry right. So bodhicitta is
the opposite of anger. So when you're
angry that means that moment you don't
have bodhicitta.
And so therefore compassion is a
medicine for everyone for our own pain
as well as others suffering.
So yeah this verse is very um powerful
but it's a sometimes if you think of
it's even though we don't have this kind
of capacity at that moment this moment
but it's very very helpful.
Now the next 14th verse is
even if someone
spreads all kinds of unpleasant remarks
about you throughout the universe. In
return with a love in mind speaking good
qualities of that person is the practice
of bodhic satta.
Again for most people this is another
difficult challenge.
However, this teaching,
you know, suggests that
no matter how harsh or unkind someone is
towards a bodhic sattva,
a bodhic satta responds with kindness.
A bodhic satta knows that someone who
acts out of anger is suffering
themselves.
So bodhic satta can learn to respond
more skillfully.
Bodhic sattas never react with anger
towards someone in such a difficult
situations.
Bodhic sattvas recognize that
they are under the power of ignorance,
anger, no compassion and so forth. They
understand that's why they
their compassion is so
genuine and strong.
So the bodhic servas the the ultimate
goal is to help others
when they are in difficult situation.
That's the that's the ultimate goal. If
you are in a good situation you don't
need really help right?
When we need help when we are in
difficult situation
and when you are in difficult situation
you are always not happy. you react
negatively you know but bodhic sattvas
have a capacity to handle that.
So in our daily life there are always
problems,
obstacles.
We don't like when someone says you know
unpleasant words behind us
or to our friends or our family.
we become angry
and it can be challenging.
So in this situation
before reacting
bodhic sattvas what they do is take a
moment to reflect
and if you know your actions and your
intentions are honest
then sometimes it is good idea
to approach the person and address the
issue to clear up misunderstanding.
However, if the situation is not worth
addressing, then it's better to let it
go.
So it's a you know therefore bodhic
sattas has one part they have they have
uh great wisdom
so they know how to handle the situation
and then the other part they have a
genuine compassion whatever they're
doing is benefit for this people or
beings.
So it depends. Sometimes we have to talk
when we have this kind of difficult
situation
and clear up misunderstanding.
Sometimes we just uh need to let it go.
It depends on the situation.
But you know it's uh
difficult to handle situations like this
because we are so
attached to our reputation.
So if someone ruins
your reputations
is a really painful experience.
We, you know, usually
think anyone who says something nice
about us is a wonderful person
and we think someone who doesn't like us
is a bad person, right? And we say you
are not my friend anymore.
When someone hurts you,
it takes time to process your your your
emotions
whether it's anger,
uh sadness or frustration,
it's difficult but uh
as a bodhic sattva you know
we should understand that we can't
control
what others say about us. We can't
control that. But we can control how we
live our life.
So what matters most is
uh try to live in compassionately
not only towards others but also towards
yourself towards ourselves. So we should
focus on a peaceful sort of inner life.
Try not to control what other people say
about us cuz we can't control that.
But if we if we do do things good and
react like positively, compassionate,
then people say nice things about us.
Anyway,
uh now now the next 15 verse is
even if in the midst of a public
gathering someone exposes your fault. s
and speaks harsh words about you. Still
seeing that person as a spiritual
teacher
and bound with
respect is the practice of Buddhis.
The difference between the last verse
and this verse is
in this verse we are dealing with
sort of abusive that is right in our
face right the situation is in public
but the last verse is someone saying bad
words and things like that behind our
That that's a different not necessarily
in public or not necessarily in faith in
our face you know but more sort of
broadly
here it's about harsh sort of verbal
abuse exposion what is wrong with you
and really saying terrible things that
may or may not be True.
That's a different so Adisha said you
know when you hear unpleasant words
regards them as a echo
right.
So when someone criticize somebody
especially in public
and this situation almost almost any
ordinary person will become angry
and they may think that
think that since they're in public if
they don't replay to this situation
everyone will assume it is true, right?
But bodhic sattas regard this as a great
taste of their ability to subdue their
ego.
Bodhic sattas deal with this situation
by thinking that maybe what they saying
could be true. I can't see it for myself
because of my ego, my selfishness. So
this moment is seen as opportunity to
investigate themselves and find out the
truth.
So when someone
sort of uses unpleasant speech towards
us and if we are able to remain calm and
handle it well
even though it is it is painful.
It would be really good for us because
it develops our bodhic chitta
teacher say it's just like um
after having an operation
the pain from the sickness is completely
removed.
It's difficult at that moment but it's
good for us afterwards.
So this practice is not about
allowing others to mistreat you but
rather about an opportunity
for inner development bodhic jetta and
it reflects a deep commitment to
maintaining a compassionate mind.
But it's again it's really difficult
by not re reacting with anger and by
cultivating patience
which is a key
uh practice on the bodhicatta path.
Therefore, it says here we should
consider that person as a spiritual
teacher
in in in the west they can't say they
can't do that but in like in Tibet you
know spiritual the teachers say the
student don't do that this is wrong this
is your fault this is not they say like
that right so uh when somebody say in
front of us this kind of critic you know
then bodhic sattvas considered this
person
as their spiritual teacher.
So in Mahayana Buddhism,
difficult conditions are the best
conditions
uh to um inspire practitioners to
practice the dharma
and bodhicetta.
Kazimup always
said that when you hear
this kind of you know unpleasant
words
try to take them positively
and use them as a chance to let go of
your own ego.
He said, "You know, it might
sound strange to you, but it is
definitely true."
Why?
It is because in in in our everyday life
if we contemplate
on the methods of uh handling our anger
one day
when the real situation
happens we will be able to overcome our
anger.
practitioners, bodhic sattas always like
even though there is no negative or bad
you know friends in front of you like
that say this nasty things and but they
always meditate you know oh this person
saying all these things and this verses
and they meditate if they say this well
how do I handle this and they always you
know meditate like that
if
If we don't practice regularly
when we face the real situation, we will
not be able to practice patient. We will
not not remember bodhicitta and
compassion at all when we hear this kind
of you know unpleasant words and
and we we we get angry like more angry
because you know I'm not doing anything
wrong.
So when you have time,
chant these verses and contemplate on
their meaning, you know. Um I think
that's that's very important. So don't
think this practice is not for me. Okay,
I'm not there yet and this is too much.
This is is I'm not there. This not this
practice is not for me. Just forget it.
Don't think that. Just just
chant you know these verses and then
think about the meaning and if this
really happened to me what should I do
and think about animals this happen all
the time what should we do
okay now the next 16 16th verse
Even if someone whom you cherish as
dearly as your own child
then treats you as an enemy in return.
Like a mother whose child is sick,
loving that person even more is the
practice of bodhic sattvas.
This situation is about someone who is
very close to you
and then for some reason
or without any reason at all that person
turns against you,
right? Which sometimes happens in our
life.
If if a stranger
does this to you,
it's not that hurtful, right? But with
someone you deeply love and care about,
all of a sudden regards you as an enemy
and harms you. It's painful.
It's difficult, right?
However, as bodhic sat for
practitioners, you're not supposed to be
upset.
So if we act like ordinary people in
this kind of situation,
what is special about our bodhic
practice?
Then you know there will be no
difference between the person who
doesn't know anything about bodhicitta
and the person who is supposed to be a
bodhic sattva or on the path of bodhic
sattva.
What is different?
So that's why this verse tells us to
allow ourselves to feel the hurt and
sadness but without anger. So we can
practice this in our mind.
So it says a mother whose child is sick
loving that person even more.
It's like a mother whose child is sick
and starts attacking the mother who is
trying to protect the child.
But the mother will not try to harm her
child back. Right? Instead, she will
have even more love and concern for the
child. So in the same way when someone
we love
turns against us
we should not respond with anger that's
I mean that's this verses you know
but we should we should we should see
them as sick with disturbing emotions.
So, so much to suggest that we should
respond with even more compassion and
forgiveness.
Forgiveness is about
um releasing the burden of anger for our
own happiness
and peace of mind.
forgiving them allows us to free our
mind from resentment
without holding in onto anger. So it is
good for uh uh uh developing our body to
the practice
as in the um the the the
advers on mind training. Do you remember
when a person I have benefited and care
for deeply
hurts me very badly? May I regard them
as my supreme teacher? Do you remember?
Same thing.
So there are many situations which are
very similar to
what is mentioned in this verse. So
these verses speak
um of our relationships with someone we
love, we care about, but this person
views us as an enemy.
It could happen. So this situation
happens all the time,
especially in relationships, right?
First, first you deeply love,
you care about someone, and then as time
goes on,
your love slowly turns into jealousy and
anger and uncomfortable and, you know,
uncatient whatever.
And then your trust turns into you know
doubt and hesitations and fear. Um then
your happiness turns into conflicts.
Your um your pleasant time
um turns into fighting all the time.
That is why in Buddhism
practicing detachment for our
relationship is important because if you
do that none of this will happen.
So when I say this um
you know you you would think it make
makes no sense but but practicing
detachment doesn't mean we don't care
about each other. Don't misunderstand.
It means letting go of all these um high
expectations.
So this verse tells us, you know, when
someone you love
regards you as an enemy, you should love
that person even more.
Again, it's not easy. It takes time.
But that is the goal of bodhic sattas.
If you consider yourself as a bodhic
satta your goal
otherwise when you're when you're happy
you have everything and you don't have
to practice patience why you need
patience
right
so if you are not ordinary person if you
if you consider yourself as bodhic
sattva this is the goal when you have
tough difficult situations then then you
will see your real body suffer or not?
Not.
So you know it says right in Mahayana
Buddhism,
Mahayana Buddhism is is incredible. It's
so beneficial and we as ordinary person
we can do this. We can practice Mahayana
Buddhism.
So in Mahayan Buddhism such challenges
can be seen as opportunity to grow your
bodhicitta.
So when we contemplate and practice in
this way our heart of bodhic jitta will
definitely increase.
So bodhic jitta is the best method to
transform suffering into happiness.
That's why I'm always focused on how to
practice bodhicitta, how to teach
bodhicetta, you know.
So without uh practice and compassion
and bodhicitta, there is no way
to get through the bodhic satta path. So
we must pay attention to this because
it's it's a it's a it's an essential u
part of part of practice.
Okay.
Now the next
17 verse
even when someone who is your equal or
inferior
disparage.
Am I right? How do I say this? Okay. you
out of arrogance
placing that person on the crown of your
head put it there with the same respect
of your guru is the practice of bodhic
sattvas
okay this this verse um suggest that
when someone who is your
um
um social equal
or even your inferior
and position
criticize you unfairly
or disrespect you out of arrogance or
jealousy.
You should respond not with anger
but with respect.
That moment can teach you patience.
uh selfawwareness
and the ability to let go of your ego.
As you know, one of the greatest
obstacles
on the body sata path is ego, arrogance,
selfish, selfishness.
In Mayan Buddhist Sata path
every experience is seen as an
opportunity
for growth and chance.
Body surface always see that understand
that this is a good chance that I can
increase my body jettas.
So they, you know, seen as an
opportunity
for change to bring about true change in
your mind is is is is hard at first. But
if you understand the meaning
behind this mind training
and keep on trying to apply it, you will
find that it helps you in every
difficult situation.
So these teachings really encourage
develop an inner
um
stability.
This helps us m maintain uh clarity in
all situations.
So the point in this verse is basically
to learn not to respond with anger
and the result is that you develop
patience and bodhicitta.
The main point of this verse is uh we
should respect
uh either someone who is in a higher
position,
someone who is rich, famous and so on as
well as someone who is in a lower
position who is poor, not famous and and
so on.
Both should be equal. That's what this
verse, the main point of this verse.
Both should be equal.
But we usually don't respect them
equally, right?
If there is a famous person
you know in Tiban culture we give them a
katas and we want to take pictures with
them and but if there is a beggar person
poor person who is miserable we don't
want to talk with them we even don't
want go near them
ah it's dirty it smells bad maybe
dangerous you
So Buddhism you know Buddha said don't
respect me. Buddha said but don't
respect me more than an other being.
So the great Mahayana you know great
practitioners
tasures mother sentient beings as equal
to the Buddha.
It's because they have been they have
been our mothers in countless lives
and they provides us with the
opportunities to cultivate bodhicitta
and um attain liberation.
So for these reasons mother sentient
beings are not lower but are equal to
the Buddha.
So in Mahayana Buddhism we should not
have any kind of uh um
uh discrimination.
We should respect all beings equally.
Okay that is
the main point and the main you know
this verse. Uh keep that in mind. We
should not have any kinds of
discrimination.
We should respect all sentient beings
include animals equally.
Uh
okay. Now we're going to um
recite